What, have I scaped love-letters
in the holiday- time of my beauty,
and am I now a subject for them?
Let me see.
'Ask me no reason why I love you;
for though Love use Reason for his physician,
he admits him not for his counsellor.
You are not young, no more am I;
go to then, there's sympathy:
you are merry, so am I; ha, ha!
then there's more sympathy: you love sack,
and so do I;
would you desire better sympathy?
Let it suffice thee, Mistress Page,
--at the least, if the love of soldier
can suffice,-- that I love thee.
I will not say, pity me;
'tis not a soldier-like phrase:
but I say, love me.
By me, Thine own true knight,
By day or night,
Or any kind of light,
With all his might
For thee to fight, JOHN FALSTAFF'
What a Herod of Jewry is this!
O wicked world!
One that is well-nigh worn to pieces with age
to show himself a young gallant!
What an unweighed behavior
hath this Flemish drunkard picked
--with the devil's name!
--out of my conversation,
that he dares in this manner assay me?
Why, he hath not been thrice in my company!
What should I say to him?
I was then frugal of my mirth:
Heaven forgive me!
Why, I'll exhibit a bill
in the parliament for the putting down of men.
How shall I be revenged on him?
for revenged I will be,
as sure as his guts are made of puddings.
Mistress Page! trust me,
I was going to your house.
And, trust me, I was coming to you.
You look very ill.
Nay, I'll ne'er believe that;
I have to show to the contrary.
Faith, but you do, in my mind.
Well, I do then; yet I say
I could show you to the contrary.
O Mistress Page, give me some counsel!
What's the matter, woman?
O woman, if it were not
for one trifling respect,
I could come to such honour!
Hang the trifle, woman!
take the honour. What is it?
dispense with trifles; what is it?
If I would but go to hell
for an eternal moment or so,
I could be knighted.
What? thou liest! Sir Alice Ford!
These knights will hack;
and so thou shouldst not alter the article of thy gentry.
We burn daylight: here, read, read;
perceive how I might be knighted.
I shall think the worse of fat men,
as long as I have an eye to make difference
of men's liking:
and yet he would not swear;
praised women's modesty;
and gave such orderly
and well-behaved reproof to all uncomeliness,
that I would have sworn his disposition
would have gone to the truth of his words;
but they do no more adhere
and keep place together
than the Hundredth Psalm
to the tune of 'Green Sleeves.'
What tempest, I trow,
threw this whale,
with so many tuns of oil in his belly,
ashore at Windsor?
How shall I be revenged on him?
I think the best way were to entertain him with hope,
till the wicked fire of lust
have melted him in his own grease.
Did you ever hear the like?
Letter for letter,
but that the name of Page and Ford differs!
To thy great comfort in this mystery
of ill opinions,
here's the twin-brother of thy letter:
but let thine inherit first;
for, I protest, mine never shall.
I warrant he hath a thousand of these letters,
writ with blank space for different names
--sure, more,
--and these are of the second edition:
he will print them, out of doubt;
for he cares not what he puts into the press,
when he would put us two.
I had rather be a giantess,
and lie under Mount Pelion.
Well, I will find you twenty lascivious turtles
ere one chaste man.
Why, this is the very same; the very hand,
the very words. What doth he think of us?
Nay, I know not:
it makes me almost ready to
wrangle with mine own honesty.
I'll entertain myself like one
that I am not acquainted withal;
for, sure, unless he know some strain in me,
that I know not myself,
he would never have boarded me in this fury.
'Boarding,' call you it?
I'll be sure to keep him above deck.
So will I if he come under my hatches,
I'll never to sea again.
Let's be revenged on him:
let's appoint him a meeting;
give him a show of comfort in his suit
and lead him on with a fine-baited delay,
till he hath pawned his horses
to mine host of the Garter.
Nay, I will consent
to act any villany against him,
that may not sully
the chariness of our honesty.
O, that my husband saw this letter!
it would give eternal food to his jealousy.
Why, look where he comes;
and my good man with him
he's as far from jealousy
as I am from giving him cause;
and that I hope is an unmeasurable distance.
You are the happier woman.
Let's consult together against this greasy knight.
Come hither.
Well, I hope it be not so.
Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs:
Sir John affects thy wife.
Why, sir, my wife is not young.
He wooes both high and low,
both rich and poor,
Both young and old,
one with another, Ford;
He loves the gallimaufry:
Ford, perpend.
Love my wife!
With liver burning hot. Prevent, or go thou,
Like Sir Actaeon he,
with Ringwood at thy heels:
O, odious is the name!
What name, sir?
The horn, I say. Farewell.
Take heed, have open eye,
for thieves do foot by night:
Take heed, ere summer comes
or cuckoo-birds do sing.
Away, Sir Corporal Nym!
Believe it, Page; he speaks sense.
I will be patient; I will find out this.
And this is true;
I like not the humour of lying.
He hath wronged me in some humours:
I should have borne
the humoured letter to her;
but I have a sword which can bite upon my necessity.
He loves your wife;
there's the short and the long.
My name is Corporal Nym;
I speak and I avouch;
'tis true: my name is Nym
and Falstaff loves your wife.
Adieu. I love not the humour of bread and cheese,
and there's the humour of it. Adieu.
'The humour of it,' quoth a'!
here's a fellow frights English out of his wits.
I will seek out Falstaff.
I never heard such a drawling, affecting rogue.
If I do find it: well.
I will not believe such a Cataian,
though the priest o' the town
commended him for a true man.
'Twas a good sensible fellow: well.
How now, Meg!
Whither go you, George? Hark you.
How now, sweet Frank!
why art thou melancholy?
I melancholy! I am not melancholy.
Get you home, go.
Faith, thou hast some crotchets in thy head. Now,
will you come, Mistress Page?
Have with you.
You'll come to dinner, George.
Look who comes yonder:
she shall be our messenger
to this paltry knight.
Trust me, I thought on her:
she'll fit it.
You are come to see my daughter Anne?
Ay, forsooth; and, I pray,
how does good Mistress Anne?
Go in with us and see:
we have an hour's talk with you.
How now, Master Ford!
You heard what this knave told me,
did you not?
Yes: and you heard what the other told me?
Do you think there is truth in them?
Hang 'em, slaves!
I do not think
the knight would offer it:
but these that accuse him
in his intent towards our wives
are a yoke of his discarded men;
very rogues, now they be out of service.
Were they his men?
Marry, were they.
I like it never the better for that.
Does he lie at the Garter?
Ay, marry, does he.
If he should intend this voyage towards my wife,
I would turn her loose to him; and what he gets more of her
than sharp words, let it lie on my head.
I do not misdoubt my wife;
but I would be loath
to turn them together.
A man may be too confident:
I would have nothing lie on my head:
I cannot be thus satisfied.
Look where my ranting host
of the Garter comes:
there is either liquor in his pate
or money in his purse
when he looks so merrily.
How now, mine host!
How now, bully-rook! thou'rt a gentleman.
Cavaleiro-justice, I say!
I follow, mine host, I follow.
Good morrow and twenty, good Master Page!
Will you go with us? we have sport in hand.
Tell him, cavaleiro-justice;
tell him, bully-rook.
Sir, there is a fray to be fought
between Sir Hugh the Welsh priest
and Caius the French doctor.
Good mine host o' the Garter,
a word with you.
What sayest thou, my bully-rook?
Will you go with us to behold it?
My merry host hath had the measuring
of their weapons;
and, I think,
hath appointed them contrary places;
for, believe me,
I hear the parson is no jester.
Hark, I will tell you
what our sport shall be.
Hast thou no suit against my knight,
my guest-cavaleire?
None, I protest:
but I'll give you a pottle
of burnt sack to give me
recourse to him and tell him
my name is Brook; only for a jest.
My hand, bully;
thou shalt have egress and regress;
--said I well?
--and thy name shall be Brook.
It is a merry knight.
Will you go, An-heires?
Have with you, mine host.
I have heard the Frenchman
hath good skill in his rapier.
Tut, sir, I could have told you more.
These days, you stand upon distance,
your passes, stoccadoes,
and I know not what: 'tis the heart,
Master Page; 'tis here, 'tis here.
I have seen the time,
with my long sword
I could have made you four tall fellows skip like rats.
Here, boys, here, here!
shall we wag?
Have with you.
I would rather hear them scold than fight.
Though Page be a secure fool,
an stands so firmly
on his wife's frailty,
yet I cannot put off
my opinion so easily:
she was in his company at Page's house;
and what they made there, I know not.
Well, I will look further into't:
and I have a disguise to sound Falstaff.
If I find her honest,
I lose not my labour;
if she be otherwise,
'tis labour well bestowed.
I will not lend thee a penny.
Why, then the world's mine oyster.
Which I with sword will open.
I will retort the sum in a quippage.
Not a penny. I have been content,
sir, you should lay my countenance to pawn;
I have grated upon my good friends
for three reprieves for you
and your coach-fellow Nym; or else you had looked
through the grate, like a geminy of baboons.
I am damned in hell for swearing
to gentlemen my friends,
you were good soldiers and tall fellows;
and when Mistress Bridget lost the handle
of her fan, I took't upon mine honour
thou hadst it not.
Didst not thou share?
hadst thou not fifteen pence?
Reason, you rogue, reason:
thinkest thou I'll endanger my soul gratis?
At a word, hang no more about me,
I am no gibbet for you.
Go. A short knife and a throng!
To your manor of Pickt-hatch! Go.
You'll not bear a letter for me?
You stand upon your honour!
Why, thou unconfinable baseness,
it is as much as I can do
to keep the terms of my honour precise:
I, I,
I myself sometimes,
leaving the fear of God
on the left hand
and hiding mine honour
in my necessity,
am fain to shuffle,
to hedge and to lurch;
and yet you, rogue,
will ensconce your rags,
your cat-a-mountain looks,
your red-lattice phrases,
and your bold-beating oaths,
under the shelter of your honour!
You will not do it, you!
I do relent: what would thou more of man?
Sir, here's a woman would speak with you.
Let her approach.
Give your worship good morrow.
Good morrow, good wife.
Not so, an't please your worship.
Good maid, then.
I'll be sworn,
As my mother was,
the first hour I was born.
I do believe the swearer. What with me?
Shall I vouchsafe your worship a word or two?
Two thousand, fair woman:
and I'll vouchsafe thee the hearing.
There is one Mistress Ford, sir:
I pray, come a little nearer this ways:
I myself dwell with master Doctor Caius,
Well, on: Mistress Ford, you say,--
Your worship says very true:
I pray your worship,
come a little nearer this ways.
I warrant thee, nobody hears;
mine own people, mine own people.
Are they so? God bless them
and make them his servants!
Well, Mistress Ford; what of her?
Why, sir, she's a good creature.
Lord Lord! your worship's a wanton!
Well, heaven forgive you
and all of us, I pray!
Mistress Ford; come, Mistress Ford,--
Marry, this is the short
and the long of it;
you have brought her
into such a canaries as 'tis wonderful.
The best courtier of them all,
when the court lay at Windsor,
could never have brought her
to such a canary.
Yet there has been knights,
and lords, and gentlemen,
with their coaches,
I warrant you, coach after coach,
letter after letter,
gift after gift; smelling so sweetly,
all musk, and so rushling, I warrant you,
in silk and gold; and in such alligant terms;
that would have won any woman's heart;
and, I warrant you,
they could never get an eye-wink of her:
I had myself twenty angels
given me this morning;
but I defy all angels,
in any such sort, as they say,
but in the way of honesty:
and, I warrant you,
they could never get her so much
as sip on a cup with the proudest
of them all:
and yet there has been earls,
nay, which is more, pensioners;
but, I warrant you, all is one with her.
But what says she to me?
be brief, my good she-Mercury.
Marry, she hath received your letter,
for the which she thanks you
a thousand times;
and she gives you to notify
that her husband will be absence
from his house between ten and eleven.
Ten and eleven?
Ay, forsooth;
and then you may come
and see the picture, she says,
that you wot of:
Master Ford, her husband,
will be from home.
Alas! the sweet woman
leads an ill life with him:
he's a very jealousy man:
she leads a very frampold life
with him, good heart.
Ten and eleven.
Woman, commend me to her;
I will not fail her.
Why, you say well.
But I have another messenger
to your worship.
Mistress Page hath her
hearty commendations to you too:
and let me tell you in your ear,
she's as fartuous a civil modest wife,
and one, that will not miss you
morning nor evening prayer,
as any is in Windsor,
whoe'er be the other:
and she bade me tell your worship
that her husband is seldom from home;
but she hopes there will come a time.
I never knew a woman so dote
upon a man:
surely I think you have charms,
la; yes, in truth.
Not I, I assure thee:
setting the attractions
of my good parts aside
I have no other charms.
Blessing on your heart for't!
But, I pray thee, tell me this:
has Ford's wife and Page's wife
acquainted each other how they love me?
That were a jest indeed!
they have not so little grace, I hope:
that were a trick indeed!
but Mistress Page would desire you
to send her your little page,
of all loves:
her husband has a marvellous infection
to the little page;
and truly Master Page is an honest man.
Never a wife in Windsor
leads a better life than she does:
do what she will, say what she will,
take all, pay all,
go to bed when she list,
rise when she list,
all is as she will:
and truly she deserves it;
for if there be a kind woman
in Windsor, she is one.
You must send her your page;
no remedy.
Why, I will.
Nay, but do so,
and, look you,
he may come and go between you both;
and in any case have a nay-word,
that you may know one another's mind,
and the boy never need
to understand any thing;
for 'tis not good that children
should know any wickedness:
old folks, you know, have discretion,
as they say, and know the world.
Fare thee well:
woman, commend me to them both:
there's my purse; I am yet thy debtor.
Boy, go along with this woman.
This news distracts me!
This punk is one of Cupid's carriers:
Clap on more sails; pursue;
up with your fights:
Give fire: she is my prize,
or ocean whelm them all!
Sayest thou so, old Jack?
go thy ways;
I'll make more of thy old body
than I have done.
Will they yet look after thee?
Wilt thou, after the expense
of so much money, be now a gainer?
Good body, I thank thee.
Let them say 'tis grossly done;
so it be fairly done, no matter.
Sir John, there's one Master Brook
below would fain speak with you,
and be acquainted with you;
and hath sent your worship
a morning's draught of sack.
Brook is his name?
Ay, sir.
Call him in.
Such Brooks are welcome
that o'erflow such liquor.
Ah, ha!
Mistress Page and Mistress Ford
have I encompassed you? go to; via!
Bless you, sir!
And you, sir! Would you speak with me?
I make bold to press
with so little preparation upon you.
You're welcome. What's your will?
Give us leave, drawer.
Sir, I am a gentleman
that have spent much;
my name is Brook.
Good Master Brook,
I desire more acquaintance of you.
Good Sir John, I sue for yours:
not to charge you;
for I must let you understand
I think myself in better plight
for a lender than you are:
the which hath something embolden'd me
to this unseasoned intrusion;
for they say, if money go before,
all ways do lie open.
Money is a good soldier, sir,
and will on.
Troth, and I have a bag
of money here troubles me:
if you will help to bear it, Sir John,
take all, or half, for easing me
of the carriage.
Master Brook, I know not how I may deserve
to be your porter.
I will tell you, sir,
if you will give me the hearing.
Speak, good Master Brook:
I shall be glad to be your servant.
Sir, I hear you are a scholar,
I will be brief with you,
and you have been a man long known to me,
though I had never so good means, as desire,
to make myself acquainted with you.
I shall discover a thing to you,
wherein I must very much lay open
mine own imperfection:
but, good Sir John,
as you have one eye upon my follies,
as you hear them unfolded,
turn another into the register
of your own;
that I may pass
with a reproof the easier,
sith you yourself know how easy
it is to be such an offender.
Very well, sir; proceed.
There is a gentlewoman in this town;
her husband's name is Ford.
Well, sir.
I have long loved her, and,
I protest to you,
bestowed much on her;
followed her
with a doting observance;
engrossed opportunities to meet her;
fee'd every slight occasion
that could but niggardly
give me sight of her;
not only bought many presents
to give her,
but have given largely
to many to know
what she would have given;
briefly, I have pursued her
as love hath pursued me;
which hath been
on the wing of all occasions.
But whatsoever I have merited,
either in my mind or,
in my means, meed,
I am sure, I have received none;
unless experience be a jewel
that I have purchased
at an infinite rate,
and that hath taught me to say this:
'Love like a shadow flies
when substance love pursues;
Pursuing that that flies,
and flying what pursues.'
Have you received no promise
of satisfaction at her hands?
Never.
Have you importuned her to such a purpose?
Of what quality was your love, then?
Like a fair house built
on another man's ground;
so that I have lost my edifice
by mistaking the place
where I erected it.
To what purpose have you unfolded this to me?
When I have told you that,
I have told you all.
Some say, that though she appear
honest to me,
yet in other places
she enlargeth her mirth
so far that
there is shrewd construction
made of her.
Now, Sir John,
here is the heart of my purpose:
you are a gentleman
of excellent breeding,
admirable discourse,
of great admittance,
authentic in your place and person,
generally allowed
for your many war-like, court-like,
and learned preparations.
O, sir!
Believe it, for you know it.
There is money;
spend it,
spend it;
spend more;
spend all I have;
only give me so much
of your time in exchange of it,
as to lay an amiable siege
to the honesty of this Ford's wife:
use your art of wooing;
win her to consent to you:
if any man may, you may as soon as any.
Would it apply well
to the vehemency
of your affection,
that I should win what you would enjoy?
Methinks you prescribe
to yourself very preposterously.
O, understand my drift.
She dwells so securely
on the excellency of her honour,
that the folly of my soul
dares not present itself:
she is too bright
to be looked against.
Now, could I could come to her
with any detection in my hand,
my desires had instance
and argument to commend themselves:
I could drive her then
from the ward of her purity,
her reputation, her marriage-vow,
and a thousand other her defences,
which now are too too strongly
embattled against me.
What say you to't, Sir John?
Master Brook,
I will first make bold
with your money;
next, give me your hand;
and last, as I am a gentleman,
you shall, if you will,
enjoy Ford's wife.
O good sir!
I say you shall.
Want no money, Sir John;
you shall want none.
Want no Mistress Ford, Master Brook;
I shall be with her,
I may tell you,
by her own appointment;
even as you came in to me,
her assistant or go-between parted from me:
I say I shall be with her
between ten and eleven;
for at that time
the jealous rascally knave her husband
will be forth.
Come you to me at night;
you shall know how I speed.
I am blest in your acquaintance.
Do you know Ford, sir?
Hang him, poor cuckoldly knave!
I know him not:
yet I wrong him to call him poor;
they say the jealous wittolly knave
hath masses of money;
for the which his wife
seems to me well-favored.
I will use her as the key
of the cuckoldly rogue's coffer;
and there's my harvest-home.
I would you knew Ford, sir,
that you might avoid him
if you saw him.
Hang him, mechanical salt-butter rogue!
I will stare him out of his wits;
I will awe him with my cudgel:
it shall hang like a meteor
o'er the cuckold's horns.
Master Brook, thou shalt know
I will predominate over the peasant,
and thou shalt lie with his wife.
Come to me soon at night.
Ford's a knave,
and I will aggravate his style;
and shalt know him for knave and cuckold.
Come to me soon at night.
What a damned Epicurean rascal is this!
My heart is ready to crack with impatience.
Who says this is improvident jealousy?
my wife hath sent to him;
the hour is fixed; the match is made.
Would any man have thought this?
See the hell of having a false woman!
My bed shall be abused,
my coffers ransacked,
my reputation gnawn at;
and I shall not only
receive this villanous wrong,
but stand under the adoption
of abominable terms,
and by him that does me this wrong.
Terms! names! Amaimon sounds well;
Lucifer, well; Barbason, well;
yet they are devils' additions,
the names of fiends:
but Cuckold! Wittol!
Cuckold! the devil himself
hath not such a name.
Page is an ass, a secure ass:
he will trust his wife;
he will not be jealous.
I will rather trust a Fleming
with my butter,
Parson Hugh the Welshman with my cheese,
an Irishman with my aqua-vitae bottle,
or a thief to walk my ambling gelding,
than my wife with herself;
then she plots,
then she ruminates,
then she devises;
and what they think in their hearts
they may effect,
they will break their hearts
but they will effect.
God be praised for my jealousy!
Eleven o'clock the hour.
I will prevent this, detect my wife,
be revenged on Falstaff,
and laugh at Page.
I will about it;
better three hours too soon
than a minute too late.
Fie, fie, fie!
cuckold! cuckold! cuckold!
(grunting)
Jack Rugby!
Sir?
Vat is de clock, Jack?
'Tis past the hour, sir,
that Sir Hugh promised to meet.
By gar, he has save his soul,
dat he is no come;
he has pray his Pible well,
dat he is no come:
by gar, Jack Rugby,
he is dead already, if he be come.
He is wise, sir;
he knew your worship would kill him,
if he came.
By gar, de herring is no dead
so as I vill kill him.
Take your rapier, Jack;
I vill tell you how I vill kill him.
Alas, sir, I cannot fence.
Villany, take your rapier.
(yelling)
Forbear; here's company.
Bless thee, bully doctor!
How now, good doctor.
God save you, master doctor!
Give you good morrow, sir.
Vat be all you,
one, two, tree, four, come for?
To see thee fight,
to see thee foin,
to see thee traverse;
to see thee here,
to see thee there;
to see thee pass thy punto,
thy stock, thy reverse,
thy montant.
Is he dead, my Ethiopian?
is he dead, my Francisco? ha, bully!
What says my AEsculapius?
my Galen? my heart of elder?
ha! is he dead, bully stale?
is he dead?
he is de coward Jack priest
of de vorld;
he is not show his face.
Thou art a Castalion-King-Urinal.
Hector of Greece, my boy!
I pray you, bear vitness
that me have stay six or seven,
two, tree hours for him,
and he is no come.
He is the wiser man, master doctor:
he is a curer of souls,
and you a curer of bodies;
if you should fight,
you go against the hair
of your professions.
Is it not true, Master Page?
Master Shallow, you have yourself
been a great fighter,
though now a man of peace.
Bodykins, Master Page,
though I now be old and of the peace,
if I see a sword out,
my finger itches to make one.
Though we are justices and doctors
and churchmen, Master Page,
we have some salt
of our youth in us;
we are the sons of women, Master Page.
'Tis true, Master Shallow.
It will be found so, Master Page.
Master Doctor Caius,
I am come to fetch you home.
I am sworn of the peace:
you have showed yourself
a wise physician,
and Sir Hugh hath shown himself
a wise and patient churchman.
You must go with me, master doctor.
Pardon, guest-justice.
A word, Mounseur Mockwater.
Mock-vater! vat is dat?
Mock-water, in our English tongue,
is valour, bully.
By gar, den,
I have as mush mock-vater
as de Englishman.
Scurvy jack-dog priest!
by gar, me vill cut his ears.
He will clapper-claw thee tightly, bully.
Clapper-de-claw! vat is dat?
That is, he will make thee amends.
By gar, me do look
he shall clapper-de-claw me;
for, by gar, me vill have it.
And I will provoke him to't, or let him wag.
Me tank you for dat.
And, moreover, bully,
--but first, master guest,
and Master Page,
and eke Cavaleiro Slender,
go you through the town to Frogmore.
Sir Hugh is there, is he?
He is there:
see what humour he is in;
and I will bring the doctor
about by the fields.
Will it do well?
We will do it.
Adieu, good master doctor.
By gar, me vill kill de priest;
for he speak for a jack-an-ape
to Anne Page.
Let him die:
sheathe thy impatience,
throw cold water on thy choler:
go about the fields with me
through Frogmore:
I will bring thee
where Mistress Anne Page is,
at a farm-house a-feasting;
and thou shalt woo her.
Cried I aim? said I well?
By gar, me dank you for dat:
by gar, I love you;
and I shall procure-a you de good guest,
de knight, de earl,
de lords, de gentlemen, my patients.
For the which I will be
thy adversary toward Anne Page.
Shall we wag then?
By gar, 'tis good; vell said.
Come at my heels, Jack Rugby.